> openssl-x509 - Certificate display and signing command

* Synopsis
	* `openssl x509 [-help] [-in filename|uri] [-passin arg] [-new] [-x509toreq] [-req] [-copy_extensions arg] [-inform DER|PEM] [-vfyopt nm:v] [-key filename|uri] [-keyform DER|PEM|P12|ENGINE] [-signkey filename|uri] [-out filename] [-outform DER|PEM] [-nocert] [-noout] [-dateopt] [-text] [-certopt option] [-fingerprint] [-alias] [-serial] [-startdate] [-enddate] [-dates] [-subject] [-issuer] [-nameopt option] [-email] [-hash] [-subject_hash] [-subject_hash_old] [-issuer_hash] [-issuer_hash_old] [-ext extensions] [-ocspid] [-ocsp_uri] [-purpose] [-pubkey] [-modulus] [-checkend num] [-checkhost host] [-checkemail host] [-checkip ipaddr] [-set_serial n] [-next_serial] [-days arg] [-preserve_dates] [-subj arg] [-force_pubkey filename] [-clrext] [-extfile filename] [-extensions section] [-sigopt nm:v] [-badsig] [-digest] [-CA filename|uri] [-CAform DER|PEM|P12] [-CAkey filename|uri] [-CAkeyform DER|PEM|P12|ENGINE] [-CAserial filename] [-CAcreateserial] [-trustout] [-setalias arg] [-clrtrust] [-addtrust arg] [-clrreject] [-addreject arg] [-rand files] [-writerand file] [-engine id] [-provider name] [-provider-path path] [-propquery propq]`
* Description
	* This command is a multi-purposes certificate handling command.
	* It can be used to print certificate information, convert certificates to various forms, edit certificate trust settings, generate certificates from scratch or from certificating requests and then self-signing them or signing them like a "micro CA".

### Options
#### Input, Output, and General Purpose Options
* `-help`
* `-in filename|uri` : read certificate, or CSR if `-req` is used
* `-new`
	* Generate a certificate from scratch, not using an input certificate or certificate request.
	* So the `-in` option must not be used in this case.  Instead, the `-subj` option needs to be given.
	* The public key to include can be given with the `-force_pubkey` option and defaults to the key given with the `-key` (or `-signkey`) option, which implies self-signature.
* `-x509toreq` : output a PKCS#10 certificate request rather than a certificate
* `-req`
	* By default a certificate is expected on input. With this option a PKCS#10 certificate request is expected instead, which must be correctly self-signed.
	* X.509 extensions included in the request are not copied by default.  X.509 extensions to be added can be specified using the `-extfile` option.
* `-copy_extensions arg`
* `-inform DER|PEM`
* `-vfyopt nm:v` : signature algorithm options used during verify operations
* `-key filename|uri`
	* This option provides the private key for signing a new certificate or certificate request.
	* Unless `-force_pubkey` is given, the corresponding public key is placed in the new certificate or certificate request, resulting in a self-signature.
	* This option cannot be used in conjunction with the `-CA` option.
	* It sets the issuer name to the subject name (i.e., makes it self-issued) and changes the public key to the supplied value (unless overridden by `-force_pubkey`).
	* Unless the `-preserve_dates` option is supplied, it sets the validity start date to the current time and the end date to a value determined by the `-days` option.
* `-signkey` : alias of `-key`
* `-keyform DER|PEM|P12|ENGINE`
* `-out filename`
* `-outform DER|PEM`
* `-nocert` : do not output a certificate (except for printing as requested by Printing options)
* `-noout` : prevents output except for printing as requested by Printing options

#### Certificate Printing Options
* **Note**: the -alias and -purpose options are also printing options but are described in the "Trust Settings" section.
* `-dateopt rfc_822(default)|iso_8601`
* `-text` : full details of the certificate in text form are printed
* `-certopt option` : customize `-text` format. see "Text Printing Flags".
* `-serial` : prints cert serial number
* `-startdate`
* `-enddate`
* `-dates` : `-startdate` and `-enddate`
* `-subject` : prints the subject name
* `-isssuer`
* `-nameopt option` : how the subject or issuer names are displayed. see `openssl-namedisplay-options(1)`.
* `-email`
* `-ext extensions`
* `-pubkey` : prints the certificate's SubjectPublicKeyInfo block in PEM format.

#### Certificate Checking Options
* `-checkend arg` : checks if the certificate expires within the next arg seconds and exits nonzero if yes it will expire or zero if not.
* `-checkhost host` : check that the certificate matches the specified host.
* `-checkemail email`
* `-checkip ipaddr`

#### Certificate Output Options
* `-set_serial n`
	* Specifies the serial number to use.
	* This option can be used with the `-key`, `-signkey`, or `-CA` options.
	* If used in conjunction with the `-CA` option the serial number file (as specified by the `-CAserial` option) is not used.
	* The serial number can be decimal or hex (if preceded by "0x").
* `-next_serial` : set the serial to be one more than the number in the certificate.
* `-days arg` : specifies the number of days until a newly generated certificate expires.  The default is 30.  Cannot be used together with the `-preserve_dates` option.
* `-preserve_dates` : when signing a certificate, preserve "notBefore" and "notAfter" dates of any input certificate instead of adjusting them to current time and duration.  Cannot be used together with the `-days` option.
* `-subj arg`
	* When a certificate is created set its subject name to the given value.
	* When the certificate is self-signed the issuer name is set to the same value.
	* The arg must be formatted as "/type0=value0/type1=value1/type2=...".
		* Special characters may be escaped by "\\" (backslash), whitespace is retained.
		* Empty values are permitted, but the corresponding type will not be included in the certificate.
* `-force_pubkey filename`
	* When a certificate is created set its public key to the key in filename instead of the key contained in the input or given with the `-key` (or `-signkey`) option.
	* This option is useful for creating self-issued certificates that are not self-signed, for instance when the key cannot be used for signing, such as DH.  It can also be used in conjunction with b<-new> and `-subj` to directly generate a certificate containing any desired public key.
* `-extfile filename` : configuration file containing certificate and request X.509 extensions to add.
* `-extensions` : section name in conf
* `-sigopt nm:v` : signature algorithm options used during signing operations
* `-badsig` : corrupt the signature before writing it; this can be useful for testing.
* `-digest`

#### Micro-CA Options
* `-CA filename|uri`
	* Specifies the "CA" certificate to be used for signing.
	* When present, this behaves like a "micro CA" as follows:
		* The subject name of the "CA" certificate is placed as issuer name in the new certificate, which is then signed using the "CA" key given as `-CAkey`.
	* This option cannot be used in conjunction with `-key` (or `-signkey`).
	* This option is normally combined with the `-req` option referencing a CSR.
	* Without the `-req` option the input must be an existing certificate unless the `-new` option is given, which generates a certificate from scratch.
* `-CAform DER|PEM|P12` : "CA" certificate format
*  `-CAkey filename|uri`
	* Sets the CA private key to sign a certificate with.
	* The private key must match the public key of the certificate given with `-CA`.
	* If this option is not provided then the key must be present in the `-CA` input.
* `-CAkeyform DER|PEM|P12|ENGINE`
* `-CAserial filename`
	* Sets the CA serial number file to use.
	* When creating a certificate with this option and with the `-CA` option, the certificate serial number is stored in the given file.
		* This file consists of one line containing an even number of hex digits with the serial number used last time.
		* After reading this number, it is incremented and used, and the file is updated.
	* The default filename consists of the CA certificate file base name with `.srl` appended.
		* For example if the CA certificate file is called `mycacert.pem` it expects to find a serial number file called `mycacert.srl`.
	* If the `-CA` option is specified and neither `-CAserial` or `-CAcreateserial` is given and the default serial number file does not exist, a random number is generated; this is the recommended practice.
* `-CAcreateserial`
	* With this option and the `-CA` option the CA serial number file is created if it does not exist.
	* A random number is generated, used for the certificate, and saved into the serial number file determined as described above.

#### Trust Settings
* A trusted certificate is an ordinary certificate which has several additional pieces of information attached to it such as the permitted and prohibited uses of the certificate and possibly an "alias" (nickname).
* Normally when a certificate is being verified at least one certificate must be "trusted". By default a trusted certificate must be stored locally and must be a root CA: any certificate chain ending in this CA is then usable for any purpose.
* Trust settings currently are only used with a root CA.  They allow a finer control over the purposes the root CA can be used for.  For example, a CA may be trusted for SSL client but not SSL server use.
* See `openssl-verification-options(1)` for more information on the meaning of trust settings.
* `-trustout`
	* Mark any certificate PEM output as \<trusted\> certificate rather than ordinary.
	* An ordinary or trusted certificate can be input but by default an ordinary certificate is output and any trust settings are discarded.
	* With the `-trustout` option a trusted certificate is output.
	* A trusted certificate is automatically output if any trust settings are modified.
* `-setalias arg` : sets the "alias" of the certificate. This will allow the certificate to be referred to using a nickname for example "Steve's Certificate".
* `-clrtrust` : clears all the permitted or trusted uses of the certificate.
* `-addtrust arg`
	* Adds a trusted certificate use.
	* Any object name can be used here but currently only *clientAuth*, *serverAuth*, *emailProtection*, and *anyExtendedKeyUsage* are defined.
* `-clrreject` : clears all the prohibited or rejected uses of the certificate.
* `-addreject arg`
	* Adds a prohibited trust anchor purpose.
	* It accepts the same values as the -addtrust option.

#### Generic Options
* `-rand files` and `-writerand file`

#### Text Printing Flags
* Not that important.

### Examples
* Print the contents of a certificate:
	* `openssl x509 -in cert.pem -noout -text`
* Print the "Subject Alternative Name" extension of a certificate:
	* `openssl x509 -in cert.pem -noout -ext subjectAltName`
* Print more extensions of a certificate:
	* `openssl x509 -in cert.pem -noout -ext subjectAltName,nsCertType`
* Print the certificate serial number:
	* `openssl x509 -in cert.pem -noout -serial`
* Print the certificate subject name:
	* `openssl x509 -in cert.pem -noout -subject`
* Print the certificate subject name in RFC2253 form:
	* `openssl x509 -in cert.pem -noout -subject -nameopt RFC2253`
* Print the certificate subject name in oneline form on a terminal supporting UTF8:
	* `openssl x509 -in cert.pem -noout -subject -nameopt oneline,-esc_msb`
* Print the certificate SHA1 fingerprint:
	* `openssl x509 -sha1 -in cert.pem -noout -fingerprint`
* Convert a certificate from PEM to DER format:
	* `openssl x509 -in cert.pem -inform PEM -out cert.der -outform DER`
* Convert a certificate to a certificate request:
	* `openssl x509 -x509toreq -in cert.pem -out req.pem -key key.pem`
* Convert a certificate request into a self-signed certificate using extensions for a CA:
	* `openssl x509 -req -in careq.pem -extfile openssl.cnf -extensions v3_ca -key key.pem -out cacert.pem`
* Sign a certificate request using the CA certificate above and add user certificate extensions:
	* `openssl x509 -req -in req.pem -extfile openssl.cnf -extensions v3_usr -CA cacert.pem -CAkey key.pem -CAcreateserial`
* Set a certificate to be trusted for SSL client use and change set its alias to "Steve's Class 1 CA"
	* `openssl x509 -in cert.pem -addtrust clientAuth -setalias "Steve's Class 1 CA" -out trust.pem`