> [source](https://kubernetes.io/docs/concepts/overview/working-with-objects/owners-dependents/)

* In Kubernetes, some [objects](https://kubernetes.io/docs/concepts/overview/working-with-objects/#kubernetes-objects) are owners of other objects. These owned objects are dependents of their owner.
* Ownership is different from the [labels and selectors](https://kubernetes.io/docs/concepts/overview/working-with-objects/labels/) mechanism that some resources also use. For example, consider a Service that creates `EndpointSlice` objects. The Service uses [labels](https://kubernetes.io/docs/concepts/overview/working-with-objects/labels) to allow the control plane to determine which `EndpointSlice` objects are used for that Service. In addition to the labels, each `EndpointSlice` that is managed on behalf of a Service has an owner reference. Owner references help different parts of Kubernetes avoid interfering with objects they don’t control.

### Owner references in object specification
* Dependent objects have a `metadata.ownerReferences` field that references their owner object. A valid owner reference consists of the object name and a [UID](https://kubernetes.io/docs/concepts/overview/working-with-objects/names) within the same [namespace](https://kubernetes.io/docs/concepts/overview/working-with-objects/namespaces) as the dependent object. Kubernetes sets the value of this field automatically for objects that are dependents of other objects.
	* You can also configure these relationships manually by changing the value of this field. However, you usually don't need to and can allow Kubernetes to automatically manage the relationships.
* Dependent objects also have an `ownerReferences.blockOwnerDeletion` field that takes a boolean value and controls whether specific dependents can block garbage collection from deleting their owner object. Kubernetes automatically sets this field to true if a controller sets the value of the `metadata.ownerReferences` field. You can also set the value of the `blockOwnerDeletion` field manually to control which dependents block garbage collection.
* A Kubernetes admission controller controls user access to change this field for dependent resources, based on the delete permissions of the owner. This control prevents unauthorized users from delaying owner object deletion.

> [!Note]
> - Cross-namespace owner references are disallowed by design. Namespaced dependents can specify cluster-scoped or namespaced owners. A namespaced owner must exist in the same namespace as the dependent. If it does not, the owner reference is treated as absent, and the dependent is subject to deletion once all owners are verified absent.
> - Cluster-scoped dependents can only specify cluster-scoped owners. If a cluster-scoped dependent specifies a namespaced kind as an owner, it is treated as having an unresolvable owner reference, and is not able to be garbage collected.
> - You can check for that kind of Event by running `kubectl get events -A --field-selector=reason=OwnerRefInvalidNamespace`.

### Ownership and finalizers
* When you tell Kubernetes to delete a resource, the API server allows the managing controller to process any [finalizer rules](https://kubernetes.io/docs/concepts/overview/working-with-objects/finalizers/) for the resource. [Finalizers](https://kubernetes.io/docs/concepts/overview/working-with-objects/finalizers/) prevent accidental deletion of resources your cluster may still need to function correctly.
* Kubernetes also adds finalizers to an owner resource when you use either [foreground or orphan cascading deletion](https://kubernetes.io/docs/concepts/architecture/garbage-collection/#cascading-deletion). In foreground deletion, it adds the foreground finalizer so that the controller must delete dependent resources that also have `ownerReferences.blockOwnerDeletion=true` before it deletes the owner. If you specify an orphan deletion policy, Kubernetes adds the orphan `finalizer` so that the controller ignores dependent resources after it deletes the owner object.

